
Animation frames in Airstrike are stored in row in a regular picture
file. Png is the best format since it has both compression and alpha
channel support. Jpeg should never be used! If the alpha channel is
missing the animation is assumed to be color-keyed, and magic pink
(255,0,255) is used as the color key.

Since there is no simple, standard, way of storing the number of
frames in a picture (there is in png, but this is not done for other
reasons. See below) the number of frames have to be explicitly given
in the sprite source code. The frames are sorted by two different
indices. The most obvious is time, but it is also possible to specify
an addition parameter when requesting a frame in the game. This
parameter is typically an angle which the sprite is facing, but it
could be another form of variation, like different colors or
whatever. The frames are stored with the time parameter varying
fastest. If, for example, the number of time frames is 3, and the
number of parameter frames is 2, then the picture file will look like
|t=0,p=0|t=1,p=0|t=2,p=0|t=0,p=1|t=1,p=1,t=2,p=1|. It is possible to
have many frames in both the t and p dimensions, but keep the memory
requirements in mind. For memory reasons there is also no support for
more than two parameters.

In Airstrike all the important sprites (like the biplanes) have 64
different angular variations. This seems smooth enough, and for very
small objects it could be even lower. For an example of an animation
with both time and parameter frames see direxpl.bmp. It has 8 time
frames and 32 parameter frames (different angles). This makes for a
total of 256 different frames. The number of angular frames should
always be a power of 2, for easy integration with the rest of the
engine (internally it works with 256 representing 360 degrees). The
effect of combining parameter and time frame can be achieved in Povray
by using, for example +KFC32 +KFF256 +KC together with

#declare my_parameter = int(clock);
#declare my_clock = mod(clock,1.0);

in Povray. This would give 8 time frames as in the example above. It
also causes the correct ordering of the frames in the final image. The
+KC argument is needed to make this just right (otherwise the final
frame would have parameter = 32, instead of the correct 31).

Inside the game engine the animations are affected by a number of
things. There is a frame delay for each frame, specifying how long it
should be displayed. This is initially set to the same value for all
frames in an animation, but can be individually modified for special
effects. The animation can be made to loop at the end, or to change to
a different animation after the last frame.  

In the most general case it is possible to specify a trigger function
which is executed as a specific (time) frame is entered. This can be
used when the animation implies certain effects, like a man firing a
rifle, or when there is a certain periodic effect (like when the
biplane gives off smoke). The variation parameter discussed above is
specified by setting the anim_p variable in the sprite. It must always
have valid values for the animation in question, and anim_p = 0 is
always valid.  In the example of the biplane anim_p (0..63) specifies
the angle which the biplane is facing. These explicit dependencies on
both the number of time frames (important for frame triggers) and the
parameter (important for the game) makes it neccessary to specify the
number of frames inside the code, instead of in the image file.

It is possible to define a 'hotspot' for each animation. This will be
the coordinate of the image drawn at the sprite position. By default
it is set as the center of the image, so the axis of rotation should
be adjusted with this in mind. In general it is fine to place the
povray origin in the center of the image, and rotate around this.
Images are automatically cropped of all transparent borders when
loaded, so you need not to worry about doing this yourself.

** Povray specifics **

Never use jitter in anti-aliasing. The -J flag removes this. Also
don't use textures that depend much on the resolution of the final
image or the amount of aa. The images for the game will always be
rendered using a transparent background and antialiasing. Use the
supplied scene file for uniform camera and lightning. Avoid bitmap
textures as much as possible (to keep the dataset small), but they are
certainly allowed. The object should look reasonably good without
alpha channel in the game if possible; please check this as you
develop.

The Airstrike sprite are rendered using Povray 3.5 or later. Things
should work on this version! There is a number of utility functions
for achieving various effects in animations in the file fun.inc. See
fun.ps for plots of these functions.

If you find something in the scene file that you think is bad it is
generally better to make a fix for this instead of creating you own
specialized solution. It is easiest if all pov files can use the same
settings (except for size and number of frames etc). Also make sure
that the object render without using absurd amounts of memory (at
least the sprites, backgrounds may be more complicated). To summarize:
Use common sense and remember that other people will render you
models, possibly on a slower computer or at a different size.

--Ulf
